Hey everybody, welcome to the Data Science Hangout. Let's get things kicked off here.
Hope everybody's having a great week. I'm Rachel Dempsey, if I haven't had a chance
to meet you yet, and I lead our pro community at Posit. Data Science Hangout is our open
space to chat about data science leadership and questions you're facing. Just getting
to hear what's going on in data across different industries all over the world. But we're here
every Thursday at the same time, same place. So if you are in the future somewhere watching
this on YouTube, you can add it to your calendar, and the details will be in the YouTube description
below. Brian, I think that's actually how you first found out about the Data Science
Hangout. But together, we're all dedicated to making this a welcoming environment for
everyone. We love to hear from everybody, no matter your level of experience or area
of work. You can join in the conversation a few different ways and jump in and ask questions.
You can jump in by raising your hand on Zoom. And to get to that, it's in the Zoom bar below
where you click on reactions. And then secondly, you could put questions in the Zoom chat.
And feel free to just put a little star next to it if you want me to read it. Maybe you're
in a coffee shop or something. And then we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions
anonymously, too. And I like to add in that it is totally okay to just listen in, too,
if you want. You don't have to jump in the conversation. But I am so excited to have
Brian joining us here today. And before introducing Brian, I forgot, Libby, that I was going to
have you do a little 30-second pitch to share something with everybody here, too. So let
me do that first. And then I'll jump over to introducing Brian.
Awesome. Thank you so much. This is a pitch on behalf of Andis and I. If you've been here
over the past few weeks, you probably know Andis. Andis and I are going to be doing a
reread book club of ISLR. We're going to do the second edition because we've gone through
the first edition. And the second edition came out, I think, like August of last year
or something. And it has fantastic resources because everything is really, really made
available by the authors online. There's YouTube lectures. There's slides. There's all kinds
of stuff. So who is this for? If you would like to join us, we're probably going to do
it on Discord. It's probably going to be one chapter a month. And it would be best for
people who are rereading like we are. A lot of people went through ISLR in their past.
They're already pretty familiar with all of these statistical concepts. And they would
like to dive into the second edition and kind of experience ISLR's take on some of the new
material, like deep learning that's been added. So if you are interested in that, please
private DM Andis or I your email address just so that when we are ready to do our thing
together, we can include you too. Or find me on LinkedIn and send me your email address
that way. It also works. Thank you, Rachel.
Yeah, absolutely. And ISLR, that's Introduction to Statistical Learning.
Introduction to Statistical Learning and R, yes. Thank you. Sorry, out of the acronym.
No, no worries. Awesome. That sounds great. Yeah. Feel free to put that into the chat, of
course, to let people know who are joining in later, too. But with that, Brian, thank you so
much for joining us today. So Brian is our Brian Fannin is our featured leader for the day.
And he is currently a research actuary at the Casualty Actuarial Society. And speaking of
books, Brian is also author of the book, R for Actuaries and Data Scientists with
Applications to Insurance. So really excited to ask you about that today to Brian, but to get us
started here, it'd be great to have you introduce yourself and maybe share a little bit about your
role now and thing you like to do outside of work, too.
Okay, so I'm an actuary and have been doing that for almost at the point where I can say 30 years
I'm rounding up slightly to get to 30 years, but I've been doing that for a while. One of the first
questions that I get when I tell people that I'm an actuary is what exactly is an actuary? I'll keep
it very, very simple for folks, though I'm happy to go into detail if folks are interested. An
actuary is an applied statistician, particularly focused on financial risk. The easier way to think
of that perhaps is we work a lot in insurance, we figure out what people need to pay for transferring
the risk of financial loss to damage to their car, to their home, or to what have you, any number of
things. So that's what an actuary does. I've been with the Casualty Actuarial Society for about five
years, more than five years, and we are very engaged in professional education, credentialing
actuaries, but also actuarial research. So that's where I nerded up with trying to develop new
concepts to improve the way that actuaries can carry out their work. I also do a lot of
speaking. As I mentioned, I was just in Boston recently at a conference, so I do dabble somewhat
in professional education. Outside of work, it will be the same set of non-professional hobbies
that I think everyone does that are fascinating and enriching to me. I spend time with my wife
and my kids, I cook, I watch movies. I can't think of anything that would really distinguish me
all that much outside of work. I like to travel, but you know, we all do. It's a really dreadful
dating profile, but happy to talk about movies or travel. Well, thank you so much for joining us,
Brian, and I just shared the link to the book in the chat if anybody wants to check it out.
But Brian, something I thought might be interesting to kick off the conversation with
is, I know you mentioned that a majority of actuaries are still doing the lion's share
of their work in spreadsheets, specifically Excel, but I was just wondering how you've seen that
start to change or how you think that might be changing in the future.
So it is changing, albeit slowly. And I can say that my experience professionally as an actuary
for the first 20 years that I was doing this was largely spreadsheet-based. That's very,
very common. There's a very easy on-ramp for people to work with Excel, which I think helps
explain some of its ubiquity. And I'll say Excel, that's usually what I mean, spreadsheet more
generally, but typically it's going to be Excel. Two years ago, the CAS issued a technology survey
about what tools actuaries were using because we're curious to see how quickly it's moving.
What we found was 98% of respondents, and we got about a thousand some odd respondents,
so pretty decent sample size, said they use 98%, I think, use Excel on pretty much a daily basis.
Whereas R or Python, the numbers were on a daily basis, certainly comfortably less than one out of
three. I would be one of the ones who uses R every day. We redid the survey last year and
the numbers moved a little bit. That survey will launch again this summer and curious to see,
if that slow and steady pace is continuing. Anecdotally, I can say that when I'm at conferences
and talking about some of the work, I do talk to folks about what tools they're using. I hear it
more. I think Python is moving a little bit quicker, largely because R had some penetration,
but I do get the sense that there is a subtle shift. A lot of it is going to be demographic.
Within the actuarial community, I'll be one of the older R users. They tend to be a little bit
younger than I am, so that shift is partially a generational change.
With that, have you had experience in helping bring people on board? I'm curious what's been
most helpful for people just getting started? I'm not sure what has or hasn't been helpful
for other people. I can tell you my approach has been to zealously evangelize using scripting tools.
I'll say R specifically. It's the one that I came to first and the one that I love the most,
but Python is good, too. I have less to say about things like Julia or JavaScript.
JavaScript might not be a great example, but Julia would be a good one. They're not bad,
I'm just not as familiar with them, and I think they don't have quite the network effect, but
evangelizing scripting tools is one of the things that I do. That's one of the reasons why I wrote
the book, so that there would be an entry point for folks who are new to Python.
To get familiar with the language. Later today, I'll be co-instructing a virtual workshop
for actuaries using R, and I also assist with the Python instruction. I hope that's helpful.
I can tell you what has been helpful for me is just recognizing the benefit that I get
from using technologies like R, like Python. It has made me a better statistician.
I suddenly found that when I was able to script a lot of these models, I understood the statistics
a lot better than I thought I did when I was trying to translate pen and paper into a spreadsheet.
Thank you. I get to ask all the questions in the beginning as we wait for them to come in
from everybody, but something I find really interesting is learning about
people's professional journeys and what takes you to different companies and gets you to where you
are. I know you've worked across many different insurance companies, like Munich Re or Swiss
Reinsurance. You were chief actuary as well. I'd love to hear about that journey and maybe
also what that transition has been like going into the casualty actuarial society,
more of a professional society rather than large organization.
Well, I did say that I love to travel. One of the ways that I tried to put that into action
was I was working in Chicago. This would have been about 20 years ago now.
One of the professional realities of white-collar work that some of us have experienced,
unfortunately, is a company where I was working was sold to someone else. I thought,
well, I'd like to work somewhere outside of the United States. I had this opportunity where I
found myself open to other positions and was able to move to Germany, not because I had said that's
going to be the place. I phoned a headhunter and said, I'd like to move somewhere on earth where
English is not the native language. Within this particular field, that means if you want to be
a non-native or rather where English is not the native language, that will be either Switzerland
or Germany, maybe France, maybe a few other countries. That was where I wound up. It was
terrific. I learned German. I got to travel quite a bit and got to see a very different perspective.
I know that I'm pretty sure that I'm the only actuary on this call, although if you're not,
please say hello. For people who are not familiar with the field, the perspective and the mode of
practice is different all over the world. Actuaries in London are different than actuaries in New York
are different than actuaries in Asia are different than actuaries in Switzerland.
Getting that perspective was really eye-opening. Also, it kind of fed into my interest in R
because a lot of the folks that I've worked with in Europe, their statistical skills were loads
better than mine. I think they were able to think in equations and be able to do things
in ways that I struggled to keep up with. That fed into my chafing against the constraints of
the spreadsheet. I'm going to send my own intellect. I'll go ahead and just out myself
with that. Like I say, I know more mathematical statistics than the average person on the street,
but I don't know as much as the typical actuary in, say, Switzerland. That was one of the draws
to getting me to R. I hope that that's interesting as a journey.
I love that. You just said, I want to go try living somewhere else and learn another language,
and you made it happen. I see a few questions coming in in the chat. Danielle, I know this
was also a question to the group too, but I was wondering if you want to jump in and ask that here.
Sure. Yeah. My company is finally looking into a proper database to help store data.
That is not my area of expertise at all, but I thought someone here might have some advice.
When I look into different kinds of databases, it seems like R&R Studio is pretty set up to
work with SQL, relational databases, but I don't know what tools are out there for if we wanted to
go with a NoSQL database. If anyone has advice, I would love to hear it. I don't want to preempt
anyone else responding. Your question about NoSQL, the experience with working with relational
databases has been pretty smooth. I have just for fun dabbled in MongoDB and Neo4j.
There are R libraries out there. At scale, there may be some pain points, but I can say that
in terms of prototyping and just getting started, there are packages that support certainly Neo4j
and MongoDB. Great. Thank you. Any other thoughts or people with experience with that?
I see there's a follow-up question. Which NoSQL database are you using? Is it MongoDB?
No NoSQL databases yet. We don't have anything selected, so if anyone has suggestions on which
one we should go with, this is still a very preliminary exploration of which kind of
database we want to use, but Brian, you said MongoDB as well. It would depend on what your
use case is. I dabbled in NoSQL largely just for some nerd fun. Relational databases are a very
proven, reliable, scalable technology. There are definitely use cases for others. I think Mongo
would be, when I say Mongo, I mean like JSON generally, depending on what data you're looking
to analyze. If it's highly transactional over the web, then probably something like
Mongo may be attractive, but relational is really good. Sorry, I was sorting through
questions and couldn't find the mute button for a second, but I see there was an anonymous question
asked on Slido, which was what mathematical and statistical methods do you use? Are there
packages for this specifically? And this being actuarial science, or are we still on databases?
I think we're going back to actuarial science, yes. There are a few, and I'll have to
reference some specific actuarial techniques. There is a technique called loss reserving.
Effectively, it's establishing the amount of liability, financial liability, and I'll get
back to boring stuff in a minute, but financial liability for an insurance company. Practically,
statistically, it is very similar to longitudinal data analysis. Not quite the same, but very,
very similar. That is one area where there are at least two packages. Both of them are called
chain ladder. One of them is R, and then there was a port to Python. Those are a couple.
There's a package called actuar, A-C-T-U-A-R, which is, I think, French for actuary, developed
in France. This is some support for statistical distributions beyond what you get in the
stats package. Actuaries often need to rely on probability distributions that have thick tails.
We've got highly skewed distributions. This is a good thing if you're a consumer. It means that
really terrible things are rare, like really terrible events are rare, but as actuaries,
we need to be able to come up with an estimate there. Actuar is another package.
I'm searching my memory. That may be about it. Which begs the question, is that all that we
need? The answer there is no. Actuaries use pretty standard techniques, like generalized linear
models, for a lot of the work that we do. I was just asking in the chat, if anybody
was looking those up and wants to share the links to those packages in the chat,
that would be awesome too. I see, Adam, you had a question in the chat. I'm actually just making
the connection now that Brian had previously worked at the Hartford as well. Adam, do you
want to jump in and introduce yourself? Yeah, hi, I'm Adam. I'm a director of data science at
the Hartford. I just joined two months ago, but it just came up this morning, in fact,
that it's very common with the rise of data science that we often have lots of resources
and cheat sheets and ways for folks to understand what data science is as it comes into their
business, but we don't often see it go the other way. I've been in the insurance industry a few
years, but I know a lot of new hires, especially in data science, struggle with learning those
actuarial concepts and the jargon and what things mean. I'm kind of looking for other
resources, other ways for us to go out and find, besides, of course, your book, other resources
where we can go out and understand these concepts and use that to collaborate with our product
partners, for example. Everyone that I've worked with is going to be really upset that I don't have
one of those at the ready. That feels like something that someone has put together.
Gosh, I'm blanking on the name of the organization. The Actuarial Foundation may have some kind of
actuary and one-on-one type of material, but I, oh gosh, is there a way for me to put
something, not in the chat, but after this, like a comment? Okay, cool. Yeah, you can send it to me
and I can put it with the recording too. Okay, yeah, I'll have to do that. I'm sure that that
material exists. I've not needed it for a very long time. Generally, if I'm talking to folks,
even if they're not actuaries, it's largely more about insurance terms. Here's a good example,
like the abbreviation IBNR. Actuaries know what that means. So do a lot of people in the insurance
industry that actuaries work with. To end the suspense, IBNR stands for incurred but not
reported. That is an amount of insurance claims that the company must estimate as being owed to
policyholders. But it's so standard on insurance financial statements that even outside the
profession, folks tend to know it. If you're a data scientist and let's say last week you were
working for, I don't know, Best Buy or Home Depot and today you're working at the Hartford, you're
not going to know what that is. Exactly. You're not going to know what that is. So that kind of
material is out there, but I'd have to look it up to share it. Yeah, we can definitely add links
after. But I see Darren had shared one in the chat, which I think is related to this. Darren,
if you want to jump in. Yeah, so the Institute, which I guess organizes designations that
actuaries tend to take. So like CPCU is a very common, very big one, but they have a few other
very specific designations that are low effort in terms of the amount of work involved
that I think are quite useful. So one of them in the chat is Associate in Insurance Data Analytics.
So it takes maybe like nine months to complete fully, but it's an official designation that
I think has been useful for our team. Also being in the insurance industry in terms of just getting
up to speed on basic knowledge terms that can be very confusing to someone starting off.
Yeah, the Institute is a very good resource.
Awesome. Yeah, thank you so much. You know, I sit in these meetings with our product partners
and they're so smart and they have this whole like dictionary in their heads. And so they're
rattling things off and I get lost. So this is very helpful. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Okay, I see an earlier question you had asked,
Bill. I'm not sure if you're able to unmute. Do you want me to read it?
The question was, Brian, are your colleagues and peers working on local laptops or perhaps
on an on-prem larger system? And the follow-up question is, would your typical actuary need to
install and manage RStudio or Anaconda on their own machine? What does the setup look like for them?
Typically it's going to be, well, I'll describe my setup, which is probably typical these days,
2021, 23, 2023. I have a laptop. I work remotely. So I've got a laptop, which will
refresh to your corporation server. We're an office, sorry, Microsoft shop,
which means that we've got one drive. And so everything is cloud synced.
And I think that's fairly typical. I have R installed. I'm not using RStudio server,
although Rachel, everybody ought to. It's a really good product. I have used it. I know
the Hartford does. I did some consulting for the Hartford and they had it. And it was a fantastic
experience. The installation of R and RStudio is pretty straightforward. It used to be a lot more
painful, but I find that it's pretty smooth these days. So installing locally, my use of R
professionally has been largely on my own. The collaboration has usually been between me and
someone at another company. And their GitHub will be the way that we're collaborating. Ideally,
that's my favorite way to collaborate, or we'll get lazy and use something like SharePoint or
just email, forgive me. But those are easy ways to collaborate. Did I hit all of that? Anaconda,
not actually a big fan of Anaconda. It's really opinionated. And I find that whenever I install
it, I'll wind up with somehow three or four different flavors of Python on my device.
I'm probably doing something wrong. It's probably my fault. But I usually just install Python.
And as with R, it's usually pretty straightforward. If I were working with a team of actuaries for an
insurance company, that's not my situation right now. I'm one of only a few actuaries. But if I
were working with a team or managing a team, I would do something like RStudio server.
I don't want to sound like a shill composite, although I would love to. I know that Microsoft
and others have similar cloud-based solutions that would probably work very, very well.
Thank you. Another anonymous question was, when you say that actuary statistical analysis are
similar to longitudinal analysis, does that include survival analysis sometimes?
Yes. There are globally two different flavors of actuary. There's a life insurance actuary,
and then there's every other actuary. In the US, it's life and health insurance. Outside of the US,
there's public health insurance schemes. And so actuaries, there's not a demand for it.
But a life insurance actuary would absolutely use survival analysis. I think a lot of techniques
that are in survival—I'm not a life insurance actuary, so I'm talking out of school a little
bit. But I think there are a lot of techniques in survival analysis that have their origin
in human mortality studies. So yeah, survival analysis is a thing.
I wrote a paper about using survival analysis in loss observing, so you could kind of think
of that as a hybrid survival analysis and longitudinal analysis.
I didn't Google that paper fast enough in time there.
There are better resources out there, yeah.
So, okay, maybe taking a step back from some of the insurance topics. I know you said
that you do a lot of public speaking, and that's something that has come up as a question before
here in the Hangout. Do you have any tips for us who are trying to get better at public speaking?
I think finding a friendly room is not a bad place to start. So locally, here in Research
Triangle, North Carolina, there are not very many actuaries, but I think folks realize that
this is a really good spot to be if you're into data science or statistics. We've got
the Research Triangle Park, we've got the universities, and we've got SAS here. So there
is a very active and super-friendly community of data scientists. I'm very much involved with a
meetup group of Research Triangle analysts, and we have monthly meetings. People can give talks
there. Really friendly room. That's not a bad place to start. What else could I say?
Yeah, present to your family, present to your friends. That's another way to find a friendly
room. And then finally, just keep doing it. The first time that I ever spoke at an actuarial
conference, I was so nervous. I thought that I was going to have a heart attack. I couldn't
believe just how petrified I was. But that was like 13, 14 years ago. It gets easier.
I love that tip of just reaching out to different meetups groups and speaking
there too. And I wanted to call out that Abigail just put in the chat, because we were talking a
little bit earlier about this on LinkedIn, but she was looking for lightning talks for a DC
meetup. So if anybody else organizes meetups and have links you want to share in the chat,
that would be great too. Yeah, pretty much any major area is going to have them. I've not managed
to get to any of the DC meetups, but DC area is kind of where home office is. So when I'm
going to the CAS office, it's in DC and I keep trying to catch up with the DC folks. But if
you're in Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, there's going to be a data nerd meetup in your town.
I can vouch for Boston. That's our group. I see, Bill, you had another question in the chat. I'll
read it here. But Bill said, I'm always interested in security and regulatory issues. Do you
anonymize or make up fake data? If so, what packages or methods do you use?
In the insurance space, there is a need for publicly available data sets for research.
As you can guess, there are a lot of privacy issues that would make people uncomfortable.
Companies certainly and policyholders are very uncomfortable sharing that data.
There are a few kind of toy data sets out there, but we do simulate data for research purposes
from time to time. When I'm researching, well, two things. One, again, for that
reserve data, the longitudinal-ish data, there are several packages that will do that. There are
about four or five. If you're not an expert, you've never heard of these things, but that will
simulate these kinds of financial transactions. Beyond that, fairly straightforward, the
ability to randomly generate a number in R, it's one of those really bedrock things
that I really enjoyed when I first started using R. In Excel, I can remember I wanted
to simulate something from a Poisson distribution. At that time, probably still today, there's no
easy way to simulate Poisson, which is a very, very common thing in actuarial applications.
You couldn't do it. I'm reading numerical recipes and all these other crazy things.
Maybe I could have just inverted the cumulative function, but whatever. In R,
I don't even need to do any of that. It's just R plus, and I've got 10,000 observations.
Things like that. You can stack them. If you've got a cascading process,
sort of a hierarchical simulation, pretty straightforward to do in R.
My favorite way to tackle that is I'm a very data frame-centric programmer. I've got a data frame
where I've got maybe 1,000 scenarios that have different parameters, and then just go row by row
using per or something like that. Each row in a data frame becomes a new data frame that is
simulating a scenario. I can just easily nest and unnest and summarize all of that stuff.
It's that Lego-based approach to simulation.
Great. Thank you. Maybe this is a question for everybody on the call here, too,
if you want to share links in the chat. Gaurav, do you want to jump in here?
The question was, are there publicly available datasets for casualty insurance?
I could have name-checked a few there. There's the insurance data package in R.
Okay. Yeah, and there's another one that's not on CRAN because it's pretty massive.
I'll dig up a link to that. Yeah, you can send it to me.
I'll send it to you, too. Yeah. I'll try and make notes of where to follow up.
Javier, I see you had a question in the chat, too. Do you want to jump in here next?
Thanks, Rachel. Yeah, thanks, Brian. I'm really enjoying your discussion here. I work with a ton
of actuaries. I'm not an actuary myself, but I work at a healthcare insurance company. I'm in our
data science center of excellence, and a lot of our stakeholders are actuaries.
We've had a lot of interest recently trying to get what feels kind of like a small army of Power
BI devs to tap into more Python and R-related capabilities to work in conjunction with Power
BI. I have a ton of Excel experience. I've got zero functional Power BI experience, so
outside of clicking around the Power BI system, I know very little about it. I didn't know if you
had any experience either pushing data or tables directly from Power BI to Power BI. I don't know
either pushing data or tables directly from an RStudio IDE to Cloud Power BI,
or maybe using Connect to facilitate that transfer. I'm still very much in exploratory mode,
but I didn't know if you had any suggestions there. I'm going to have to defer to the rest
of the folks. My experience with Power BI and Tableau, those two platforms, is virtually nil.
My hypothesis is that if you're using Power BI or Tableau, you can source data probably from
a relational database or a CSV file. I probably have a workflow where I'm routinely populating
data that I could then visualize. I may be off base there, but if someone said,
hey, you've got to use Power BI tomorrow, that's an approach that I would assume that I could take.
I can't go without saying to check out the Connect, PositConnect docs that Connor shared
there too. Javier, it looks like you have a meeting with the team tomorrow, so perfect timing
to chat about that too. Cool. Okay, another anonymous question on Slido was, do you see
R Markdown or Quarto's publishing functionality used in actuary stats work? For example,
publishing your notebooks into tables, docs, or slides directly? Not as often as I would like.
I am a big, big fan of R Markdown slash Quarto. I'm a little bit late to the party on Quarto.
I use it. The differences between Quarto and R Markdown, I'm still learning, so I use the terms
interchangeably. I wrote a 600-page textbook using R Markdown. I do pretty much all of my work
in R Markdown. I find that I'm writing notes and long-form comments suddenly become the most
important bit in the document, and so it just becomes easy to have R Markdown slash Quarto
as my starting point for work. Professionally, I've used it a lot. Stakeholders very often will
want, this isn't all that they want, but very often they can be satisfied with a reasonably
concise and informative Word document, or PDF if you'd rather, but giving them a Word document,
like, okay, here you go. Here are the tables, and here are the graphs, and here's the executive
summary. I think that's a great way to share information. Actuaries are not using it as much.
I think there's not as much awareness of R Markdown. I think the initial presumption is
that R's greatest strength, or only strength rather, is in calculation. It can absolutely
do that. It's got an incredible library of statistical and machine learning functionality,
but it does a lot more than that. That is slowly changing as with adoption of R generally.
I see that as being a real big selling point when people find out that they can replace a very
typical actuarial and kind of analytic workflow where I create a plot in Excel, and I have to
copy and paste it into Word. That's operationally inefficient. It's operationally dangerous.
So the notion that my entire analytics report is in one file, all of the code, all of the narrative,
all of the tables, it's like telling me that I can breathe underwater and fly.
It's really fantastic. So I think that as actuaries become aware of that capability,
they will get pretty happy about it, as will people who need to communicate with actuaries.
I like the way you put that copying and pasting is operationally dangerous.
Yeah. I'm not the only actuary who has been burned by that. Where you're in a meeting,
everyone's looking at the same file, and the plot didn't update.
What do you mean we're losing $1 billion a day? Oh, sorry, that's yesterday's graph.
It's really cool that your book was built on R Markdown as well. I was wondering,
what was that process like of writing a book, and how did you decide that you were ready to
write a book? Two things. One, I'll start off by saying that if it were not for R Markdown,
there is no way I ever would have written that thing. I can't imagine. Certainly, I'm not going
to write the entire document in LaTeX. There are people who can, and God bless them. I'm not the
person that could have that much LaTeX to think about, nor do I want to juggle about
12 or 13 different Word documents or one monolithic Word document. R Markdown was a
tremendous solution, and it was really empowering. The idea for the book came about from
workshops that I and others had been doing for the CAS. We had one-day workshops,
day-and-a-half workshops. I found that there was a lot of foundational material. I'm thinking about
vectors and slicing vectors and concatenation and lists and data frames. This was taking up
a large amount of scarce time. Teach somebody to be an actuary using R in about seven and a
half hours. That's a tall order. When you spend about three hours or more just making sure that
folks understand what a data frame is, that's scarce time that we're losing.
Those early slide decks, probably all of which were written in Markdown, by the way. I'm
translating it to RevealJS or something like that. We already had all of the script for those.
I sat down with those decks and said, okay, these look like book chapters. You take a 45-minute
session, and you've already got a lot of the code and the examples. At the time, I thought,
well, I'll just flesh this out with a few paragraphs, and bang, I'll have a book.
It wound up being more complicated than that. It turns out that it does take a little bit of time
to write all of the words in such a way that they make sense. But at that point, it was too late. I
was already, I think, 80 pages into it and just needed to finish. That's the story about how
that got started. We started with some more Markdown files. The need for it is to
give folks some foundational knowledge and just kind of grew from there.
Awesome. Thank you. One other anonymous question that came in, and thank you to the team gathering
those for me in the background, was how do you share your work currently, especially when teams
don't have R and need to upload CSV files? I don't have a real strong need to do that.
My sharing use case is probably not going to resemble yours,
because I'm guessing that the question comes from some points of friction. What I've done
is, I'm going to say SharePoints, grad school projects. I'm near the end of a master's degree,
and so I have had some grad school projects. It's Google Drive. The kids, they love Google,
whereas the older corporate people like SharePoint, they're both fine. That's what I
use to share data, like that CSV files. What I love to do is to collaborate on GitHub, because
it is controlled. It feels safe and deliberate. There are obviously some frictional points there
as well. Beyond that, I'm curious what other folks use, if there is some interesting magic
bullet out there. Yeah. Any thoughts? Feel free to just unmute. I can watch or raise your hand here.
I know one way that came up previously in a Hangout was creating a Shiny application
where people who didn't use R could upload the dataset and work with it in the app.
Any other ideas, feel free to share in the chat too.
Another question, I actually meant to ask you this in the beginning, but thinking about the
projects that you've been working on lately and thinking into maybe the next year ahead for your
team, what's something that you're really excited about? Me or? You. You, yeah. Oh, my.
I'm caught off guard by that. My immediate response is kind of disheartening. I don't
know that I'm excited about anything. Actually, I'll say this. I'm excited about my next trip
to a new country to talk about R. I'm cheating a little bit here. I went to South America for
the first time last year. I was invited to give a one-day workshop on statistical learning in
Bogota, Colombia. That was fantastic. Similar to the experience that I had going to Germany and
seeing a fresh perspective on the work that I was doing. Ditto down there. The folks there
were just super motivated and they had just a really interesting way of looking at things.
I enjoyed having the opportunity to interact with other folks. It's been a little while now,
but I taught, I co-instructed a short course on R in Rwanda. That was fun. Nothing like that on
the radar. I can't really claim to be excited about that. If anybody is outside of the United
States, particularly South America or Africa, and you want me to, I'll pay my own airfare.
But if you'll give me an audience for a couple of days or a week, I'd love to
go teach R to anybody that wants to be taught by me.
What's the best place for people to follow up with you on that? Is it LinkedIn?
That's a good place. Feel free to email me directly. I'm going to give you my workplace
email in the chat. There's my professional place. Then you can also find me because I've
got an R crowd here. I've got my consulting slash personal email address in there as well.
That's a really, really awful R joke that I made when I created a blog over 10 years ago
that I'm just sticking with for now. Awesome. Thank you. Another anonymous
question I saw that came in is, is there much of an actuarial R community? For example,
folks collaborating on common packages with developers between firms or sharing
use cases and best practices? I think there is not yet a community
that we're actively working to create one. There is a click. There is a small group of people.
Every two weeks, there's a meetup of some folks, a virtual meetup of actuaries who are using
open source generally. I've got some Python folks on there as well.
So there's a click, but not yet a community. How would we find out about this click if we
were interested? Good question. I hate to sound kind of gatekeeping, but I think it might have
to be an actuary. Oh, yes. I mean, if somebody is an actuary that wants to- Send me an email.
Okay. Send me an email and have a bit of patience. I get a lot of email and my response rate is not
what I would like it to be. Trust me, I really want to respond, but I get a lot of email. But
please, please, please reach out to me or find me on LinkedIn as well. Having a space for actuaries
and non-actuaries to connect, that's actually a really good thing. That's a good idea. I'd love
to work with any non-actuaries to make that happen. If anybody wants to hit me up about that,
I'm glancing at Adam in my gallery. Sounds like Javier has a-
I was going to say, sounds like Javier has a lot of experience working with actuaries as well.
Yeah. Great. Great. Yeah. Good to meet you both.
Okay. Bill had a question in the chat and I'm going to read it, Bill, because I don't
think you're unmuting here, but the question is, let me summarize this a little bit.
Do you have any opinion on using chat GPT and the effects on your industry?
Not yet. The only thing that I know, I know very little about chat GPT. I ought to be
more conversant in AI. A few years back, I just dabbled with some very, very basic exercises,
just to understand the mechanical flow. I'm blanking on the co-author, but JJ Allaire has
a really good book about AI. That was kind of my intro to that. AI generally is-
how do I phrase this? It's a slightly awkward fit for actuarial practice. That's my view,
and it may be wrong. There are definitely cases where it works. My sense is that AI
relies on a lot of observations. Insurance claims, thankfully, are pretty rare.
So those observations are kind of hard to come by. Now, that's not to say that it has no place
whatsoever in the actuarial workflow, and we've got some papers that have looked at this.
Last year at a conference, we had a really good talk about the long-short-term memory
models in loss reserving. So that's an active conversation, and we're looking at more and more
applications. Ron Richmond, I'll throw his name out there, is a very, very talented expert who's
looking at AI and deep learning in actuarial applications. Returning to chat GPT, I've already
outed myself as an old man, and I haven't really used it very much, other than I think it was last
week or the week before I posted something on LinkedIn. Someone had posed a question to chat
GPT about the Grateful Dead. I'm a big Deadhead, and the answer was just wrong. So I know that
some actuaries have fed an actuarial exam to see if it can pass, and so far it can't. So that's
good news for the profession, I suppose. Hey, Brian, that's called hallucinating. As a Deadhead,
you should be familiar with that concept. Okay. I'm a Deadhead, but I'm also a big database
nerd, and don't get me started on the statistical analysis of Grateful Dead performances.
But at the moment, especially specifically something like chat GPT,
there are not active applications that I'm aware of. Deep learning generally, yeah, there are a few,
but I see a lot more scope for lift for actuaries out of Bayesian techniques, because
we simply don't have a lot of observations, but we have loads of kind of qualitative
wisdom to bring to bear. And I would say that Bayesian techniques are just woefully underutilized.
Actuaries were at the forefront of promoting Bayesian techniques for a long time.
There's a really good book called The Theory That Wouldn't Die. Some of it's like Lady Tasting Tea.
It's kind of a popular, easy-ish to read book about statistics. There is an entire
chapter about actuaries. One of the few books you're going to find that will do that.
But they're just not mainstream. And especially with the advances in something like MCMC,
there's no reason why we can't be using them. So I'm loads more bullish on Bayesian techniques
than I am on deep learning, not immune to deep learning. That is something that we're looking at,
but I see a lot more lift out of Bayesian techniques.
Just to confirm the book that you mentioned by J.J. Lair, is that the deep learning with our
book? Probably. He had a co-author on that.
Yep. Francois and Tomas. Let me put that into the chat again here, because I actually just learned
this week that they updated this book. So there's a second edition. We had some new ones in the
office and I asked J.J. to sign one the other day for the AstraZeneca conference.
Okay. That's a really fantastic book. I'll need to pick up the second edition.
Awesome. Let me just double check here. I see a few new questions here.
I was going to say, if there's questions I have missed in the last remaining five minutes or so
here, feel free to just raise your hand on Zoom. But Santiago, I see one in the chat here.
It wasn't like an actual question, but on the conversation of gen AI and foundational models,
I'm sure many others have gotten this question. We've been asked to look for applications of
these things and how can we start applying them internally? I don't think they realize
applications are fewer and far between, but it depends. I don't know. One of my proposals was,
as a consulting firm, they're very big on brand. I'm sure others have to deal with that too, like
what to capitalize, why not to capitalize, why not train something like Falcon or Chachapiti
on your brand guide so that you don't have to read it. You just
pass it your documents and it would auto brand fix things for you.
That was kind of like a sarcastic response, but I feel like there would be application for that.
Sarcastic or not, it sounds like a decent place for it. I think there was a lot of
automatable activity that Chachapiti can help with. I love that example, Santiago.
I know we've talked about this before here, but I always think the best way to make
your proof of concept or something that you share with your leadership team stand out is to actually
use your company brand in, I don't know, if it was a shiny app, like using your logo and the
company colors, which I know Javier had wrote in a blog post before,
would be cool to see if he could run that through Chachapiti.
Let's see, any other questions that I may have missed here?
Let's see, a question I love to ask, Brian, is thinking about your career so far and your
mentors along the way throughout your career, is there a piece of career advice that stands out to
you? Good question. I'm not sure that I'm an amazing person to give career advice. I've had
a lot of luck over the years, but I've kind of randomly gone from one thing to the next,
and I don't know that that's great advice. Maybe I could spin that positively and just say,
I feel like I benefited from an openness to do other things, and also just an awareness that
depending on what industry you're in, you will need some resilience.
I worked for a really cool, really fun startup for about a year until it just evaporated. You go
into work one day and they say, well, you know, it's been fun, but the market has other ideas
about the viability of what we're all doing here, so you do need some resiliency and some openness.
I guess the mentor there has just been experience, just having lived through
some good fortune and some not so good episodes has been what has taught me that.
I will say, though, that I've got a really, really cool network. I've worked with some really,
really great people. This is advice. I'm not going to be the first person to have shared this, but
as often as you can, try to make sure that you're the dumbest person at the table.
You know, not so hard for me, but being deliberate about that has been useful.
I appreciate that advice. I also think just like listening to you today,
what I've learned is to also ask for things that you want. If you want to go and travel to a
different country and teach a workshop there, ask people if they're looking for that.
Brian, thank you so much for joining us today and sharing your experience. This has been great.
I'm going to share your LinkedIn here in the chat for everybody as well,
but thank you all for the great questions, too. Have a great rest of the day, everybody.
Bye.